Well, hey, everyone.
I'm Dave Ripper, lead pastor of Crossway Christian Church here in Southern New Hampshire, where our mission is all about practicing the way of Jesus together as we pursue God, build community, and unleash compassion.
Thanks for listening to our Milford Campus sermon podcast.
I pray that what you hear today will help you experience God more deeply and live more and more like Jesus.
Good morning.
My name's Dan Lyle.
I'm one of the pastors here at Crossway.
I'm just going to move the music stand out of the way.
And it's my pleasure to be here with you this morning.
We're in a series on Jeremiah, and it's just not the most positive book.
little dark and gloomy and snowing yet again this morning as February lingers on.
And Jeremiah didn't just write the book of Jeremiah.
He wrote the book of Lamentations, which was really just a book of worship.
And he wrote that in the midst of the exile.
And one of the most famous quoted verses
and all of scripture comes from the book of Lamentations.
It says, his mercies are new every morning.
Great is his faithfulness.
So despite the fact that it is a little gloomy this morning, despite the fact that it's snowing yet again, his mercies are new every morning.
You know how I know that?
It is doughnut Sunday.
There are apple fritters in that room right over there waiting for you.
And I don't mean to be facetious at all.
That is a simple way in which God is showing his mercy to you this morning.
Amen.
Well, Susan and I, my wife, who's sitting just over here, just a couple of weeks ago, we celebrated our 23rd wedding anniversary.
Thank you.
I'll give you something else to applaud about.
Susan didn't know what year it was and I did.
Thank you.
So roughly 21, 22 years ago, Susan and I were in a different part of the country, almost a different world.
We were living in all places, Hawaii.
We spent the first two years of our marriage living in Hawaii.
Susan was in the military and that's what took us out there.
And while we were out there, within like a month of living there, I managed to land a job at a church.
And that was a wonderful two years.
Beautiful.
There's nothing like Hawaii.
And we knew there was a time stamp on it.
We knew we wouldn't be spending our entire time there.
We got pregnant with our first child, Malia, who is now 20 years old, and we decided to pivot away from the military, and it was time for us to leave Hawaii.
And we went to, of all places after Hawaii, we went to Scranton, Pennsylvania.
If you've never been to Scranton, Scranton is the antithesis of Hawaii.
Everything you imagine Hawaii to be, Scranton is the complete opposite.
In fact, we had like a 12 hour direct flight.
And when we landed in Scranton, it was raining and it was cold and it was miserable.
Yes.
And it remained that way for a long time.
See, we went back to Scranton because we want to finish up our Bible college degrees.
And we thought we would be there for two, maybe three years at the most.
But that two to three years, a drug out to five years.
And if you've ever spent any time in Scranton, it can be hard to get escape velocity to get out of that city.
It's a dark, foreboding place that traps people.
And we could not seem to get out of it no matter how hard we tried.
And we were stuck there for a long time.
There is a quiet ache that I think follows most of us around.
It shows up when life doesn't look the way we thought it would.
When a season stretches out longer than we expect it, when something we counted on shifts.
And if we're honest, sometimes the ache is harder to name than that.
Even when life is stable, even when things are going well, there is still this subtle sense that something isn't complete.
The Bible has a word for this.
That word is exile.
Not just in a geographical sense, like we see here in the book of Jeremiah, but also in an existential sense.
A way that affects all of us.
A sense that we are not entirely home.
And Jeremiah 29 was written to people who were literally carried into exile.
They were displaced and disoriented, disillusioned.
But God says to them, and he speaks to them directly, this deeper exile that every human heart feels.
And so this morning as we turn our attention to Jeremiah chapter 29, we're gonna see three things.
We're gonna see why this ache is real, how we are meant to live in the middle of the ache of exile, and why this exile is not the end of the story.
So before we explore these movements, let's hear the story with our own ears.
Would you stand with me as we read from Jeremiah
Chapter 29.
Now these are the words of the letter which Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the rest of the elders of the exile, the priests, the prophets, and all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had taken into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon.
This was after the king and the queen mother and the court officials
the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, the craftsmen and the smiths had departed from Jerusalem.
Thus says the Lord of Host, the God of Israel to all the exiles whom I have sent into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon, build houses and live in them, and plant gardens and eat their produce, take wives and become the fathers
of sons and daughters and take wives for your sons and give your daughters to husbands that they may bear sons and daughters and multiply there and do not, do not decrease.
Seek the welfare of the city where I have sent you into exile and pray to the Lord on its behalf for in its welfare, you will have welfare.
For thus says the Lord, when 70 years have been completed for Babylon, I will visit you and fulfill my good word to you to bring you back to this place.
For I know the plans that I have for you declares the Lord, plans for your welfare and not for calamity, to give you a future and a hope.
Then you will call upon me and come and pray to me.
and I will listen to you.
You will seek me and find me.
When you search for me with all your heart, I will be found by you, declares the Lord.
And I will restore your fortunes and will gather you from all the nations and from all the places where I have driven you, declares the Lord.
And I will bring you back to the place from where I sent you into exile.
This is the word of the Lord.
You may be seated.
For Israel, exile was not symbolic.
It was quite literal.
Jeremiah 29 verses one through two, it tells us
that this is a letter written to people who had been carried off to Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar deported the king, his queen, the officials, the craftsmen, the best and the brightest of Judah.
He exported them into captivity.
Their exile, it was geographical.
They were ripped away from the country, their homeland, and moved some 700 miles away.
It was political.
Their entire political structure had been toppled and replaced by a foreign power.
And it was also cultural.
They were ripped away from the land of their culture and all their traditions and forced to take on new ones.
They were uprooted from home,
They were uprooted from the temple, from everything familiar to them.
And while most of us have not been forced into another country, I think we still know something about exile.
In the Christian life, exile often takes on a quieter, more metaphorical form.
It's the job that isn't quite what you hoped it would be.
It's the relationship that hasn't unfolded in the way that you imagined it would.
It's a political environment that feels contentious and unstable.
Are things ever going to quiet down, right?
It's a body that's overcome by sickness and disease.
And frankly, it's a church season that you didn't anticipate nor plan for.
So back when Susan and I were in Scranton, those last couple of years when we were trying to get escape velocity, I was applying for church positions.
At the time I was applying for worship pastorates.
And I was often in the top two to three candidates
There was number of times, probably five or six times, where it came down to me and one or two other people for a position.
And I would lose out on the position.
And this led to me developing the joke that I was always a bridesmaid, never a bride.
And it was incredibly difficult.
But what was far more difficult was when we actually got out.
We actually got out, I landed a position up here in central New Hampshire, my last church where I was there for almost 14 years.
And that first year there was great.
Second year, not so much.
There was a significant shift in leadership that I did not anticipate, that I did not look for, that I did not
hope for, and I certainly did not welcome.
And it shifted my expectations in wild ways.
And the reality around me, it changed drastically.
What I hoped for slipped through my fingers.
And all of a sudden I was in a very different reality than the one I planned for.
expect it, want it, hoped for.
Exile is an experience of being somewhere you did not choose.
It is dislocation, it's loss, it's disruption to the life that you hoped to have.
It's waking up one day and realizing life does not look like the version you once carried in your mind.
And in those moments, the question presses in, how do you live faithfully?
How do you live faithfully?
How do you live faithfully when you are not where you thought you would be and certainly not where you want to be?
Yet if we are honest, sometimes that ache, it runs even deeper than our circumstances.
Because Susan and I were talking about this on the way over this morning.
Even when the job is good, even when the relationship is stable, even when the political climate settles down, even when the diagnosis is favorable, there is still something unsettled in each of us.
And the Bible explains why.
Paul tells us in Philippians 3.20, he tells us that our citizenship is in heaven.
Our citizenship is in heaven.
In other words, even on our best days, we are not entirely home.
We are not entirely home.
Revelation 21, it gives us a picture of what home actually is.
It's God dwelling with his people.
God dwelling with his people, where every tear is wiped away, where death is no more and mourning is no more and pain is no more.
That's home.
And until that reality arrives, there will always be this quiet dissonance between what is and what should be.
There's always going to be this unsettledness.
This unsettleness is what caused C.S.
Lewis to write this.
He famously said, if I find in myself a desire which no one, sorry, if I find in myself a desire which no experience in this world can satisfy, the most probable explanation is that I was made for another world.
I was made for another world.
That longing you feel, the one that surfaces in disappointment but also in success, it's not accidental.
You don't just long for better circumstances, you long for ultimate belonging.
The ache isn't only circumstantial, it's eschatological.
What on earth does that mean?
Eschatological is just a fancy theological term that means the ache that we feel is rooted not just in present circumstances but in our longing for the future.
For our final home, the one that God has promised to us.
A restoration that began with Christ but has not yet been fully realized.
You were made for a home that has not fully arrived.
And here's where we often go wrong.
We treat exile like it's a detour, right?
Like it's a detour to want to endure rather than a place to inhabit.
We assume the season is accidental.
that real life will begin once things stabilize.
So what do we do?
How do we respond in moments like that?
How did I respond and scream?
Well, we wait and we grit our teeth and we count the days.
We count the days longing to that moment when we can escape all of this and live
the real life we were meant to live.
But here's the thing.
Scripture tells us that we're foreigners and exiles in this world.
We're foreigners and exiles.
That's not a temporary label on this side of glory.
That is our identity.
That's our identity.
That is who we are.
This is not a glitch in the system.
It is the Christian life, whether we like it or not.
It's like that old hymn says, this world is not my home.
I'm just a passing through.
My treasures are laid up somewhere beyond the blue.
You thought I was going to sing, didn't you?
Not this week.
Until Christ returns, there will always be some measure of displacement.
There will always be some measure of displacement, some measure of longing.
The mistake we often make is assuming that if we could just fix the circumstances, that ache would disappear.
It's funny, sometimes I feel
Like the better my circumstances are, the more that ache grows.
Why?
Because that ache you feel isn't just circumstantial, it's eschatological.
It's an ache that longs for the future.
Which means the real question isn't how to escape exile, but how to live faithfully in it.
And that's where Jeremiah 29
takes us next.
It points us to the posture of exile.
And here the Lord says something absolutely stunning.
He does not say to revolt, to retreat, to resist.
On the contrary, he says build plants and multiply.
Build plants
and multiply.
This is not what you would expect God to say to a displaced people.
But it's exactly what he says.
He says, build houses and settle down.
Don't live like this is temporary.
Don't act like you're leaving this place next month.
Put down foundations.
You're in this for the long haul."
He says, the plant gardens and eat what they produce.
In other words, learn the rhythms of the place where they are, work the soil, participate in the economy, contribute to the culture.
And finally, he says, marry and have sons and daughters and increase in number.
Think generationally.
raise families in this place, pass on the faith, invest in a future that you may not personally see or participate in.
This is long-term faithfulness that Jeremiah is calling Israel towards.
Remember, he's already said this exile will last 70 years.
Interestingly enough, that's close to the average lifespan of an American.
That means that many of the original hearers, they're going to die in Babylon.
They are never going back to Israel.
Which means this is not survival advice.
This is life advice.
He is encouraging them to not wait to live life, but to live life in the midst of these difficult circumstances.
Eugene Peterson, well-known Presbyterian theologian and pastor, he put it this way.
He said, the only place you have to be human is where you are right now.
And the only opportunity
you will ever have to live by faith is in the circumstances you are provided this very day.
Very true, great way to put it.
However, I prefer the words of my favorite Methodist theologian, Colonel Sherman T. Potter.
Any mass fans out there?
Let all know in secret.
MASH is my all-time favorite TV show.
I've seen every episode of MASH all 11 seasons, dozens of times.
Some of my favorite episodes are the Christmas episodes.
And there's this one Christmas episode where everyone is down and out because they just want to be home for Christmas.
They don't want to be in exile.
And Colonel Potter, who is
the elder of the community, he pipes up and he says, you know what everyone?
This is my third war.
I was in the war to end all wars.
Then the one after that.
And now I'm in this one.
I've spent many Christmases away from home and away from Mrs. Potter.
And you know what I have learned in that time?
I've learned this.
If you ain't where you are, you're nowhere.
Stop waiting for life to begin, because it's already started.
Stop waiting for life to begin and live faithfully now, not when the job changes,
Not when the diagnosis clears, not when the church season stabilizes, not when the culture feels easier.
Faithfulness is present obedience in the midst of unfavorable circumstances.
So live life now.
Jeremiah goes on, he says something even more radical.
He says, seek the peace and prosperity, the shalom of the city to which I have carried you into exile.
Pray to the Lord for it.
Now shalom is a Hebrew word for peace.
But it's not just a piece as a sense of the absence of conflict.
It's something more than that.
Shalom means wholeness and flourishing.
It means comprehensive human well-being.
And the Lord says something absolutely radical.
He says seek the shalom of the city.
Seek the shalom
of Babylon.
Pray for Babylon.
Bless Babylon.
More than that.
Help Babylon flourish.
This is the crazy thing.
Babylon is not neutral territory, right?
Babylon is the empire that just crushed them.
Babylon is the empire that destroyed Jerusalem.
Babylon is the empire that dismantled the temple.
And God says, work for their good.
Are you kidding me?
I mean, it's no wonder the people of Israel did not want to listen to Jeremiah.
I would not want to listen to Jeremiah.
But if we take a closer look at his words, we see that there is a divine wisdom to them.
See, the Lord corrects two instincts that we often wrestle with in our day.
The first thing he corrects is this.
The mindset that says, we must conquer the culture.
We must conquer the culture.
We assume faithfulness means defeating whoever opposes us.
We frame everything as us versus them.
But Ephesians 6-12 reminds us that our struggle is not against flesh and blood.
Winning the culture wars is not the same thing as advancing the kingdom.
The second mindset the Lord corrects here is this one.
We must withdraw
from the culture.
In other words, if we can't win it, we retreat from it.
We isolate, we create distance.
But here's the thing, isolation is not mission.
Isolation is not mission.
Instead, we're called to be a faithful presence to live distinctly
to work with excellence, to pray continually, to love sacrificially.
We're called to be a faithful presence, not to dominate Babylon, not to escape Babylon, but to bless Babylon.
Here's the thing, listen to what I'm saying and not what I'm not saying.
Okay, listen to what I'm saying, not what I'm not saying.
We never bow
to the culture.
We never bow to the culture, right?
We know that from the story of Daniel, who's a contemporary of Jeremiah.
We never bow to the culture, but we do serve it faithfully.
There is a holy tension to this, one that must be walked out in faith.
We don't have a choice.
This is what the Lord has called us to do.
We can live in obedience to it and trust Him and walk in faith, or we can choose to just walk away altogether.
As it is, we are called to be a faithful presence because when the city flourishes, we flourish.
And when we seek the good of those around us, even those who do not share our convictions,
We reflect the heart of the Lord to a fallen world.
So what does exile look like?
It looks like building when you'd rather be leaving, planting when you'd rather be protesting, raising families in a time when the future
is unsure and insecure.
It looks like praying for the very city that unsettles you.
Serving it and blessing it.
Not bowing to it, but not withdrawing from it either.
Settled, but distinct, engaged, but anchored, faithful, right here,
Right now, that is the posture of the exile.
But if that's all that Jeremiah gave us, that's all he gave us, man, it would feel awfully heavy, wouldn't it?
Build, plant, bless, serve.
If that's all it was, that would be awfully heavy.
For 70 years that would be crushing without any sense of hope.
And that's why Jeremiah doesn't just give them this posture, he also gives them a promise.
He points them to a hope that goes beyond the exile.
And Jeremiah shifts from posture to promise when the word of the Lord comes to him and says, for thus says the Lord, when 70 years have been completed for Babylon, I will visit you and fulfill my good word to you to bring you back to this place.
70 years.
70 years, the average lifespan for an American.
That is not a quick fix.
Many of them are going to die in exile, which means this promise requires faith that stretches out beyond immediate relief.
I will visit you.
I will fulfill my good word, the Lord says.
God does not forget his people.
He does not abandon his promise.
He visits, he fulfills, he acts.
He meets them in the exile.
He meets them in the exile and he says to them, for I know the plans I have for you.
I know the plans I have for you.
Plans for your welfare and not for calamity.
to give you a future and a hope.
That verse is often isolated from its context, right?
Go to Hobby Lobby and you see that on some wall decor that you can buy with a 35% off coupon.
It's often isolated from its context, but here it is spoken to exiles.
People's who circumstance, their circumstances do not feel like welfare.
Which means God's plans are not always visible in the moment.
We cannot always ascertain them.
His purposes run deeper, far deeper than our present pain.
When the Lord continues, He says, then you will call upon me and come and pray to me and I will listen to you.
You will seek me and you will find me when you search for me with
All your heart, I will be found by you, declares the Lord.
Exile, it clarifies devotion.
Stripped of illusion, stripped of comfort, the people learn to seek God again.
Paul Tripp.
puts it this way, he says, God willingly puts us in situations to expose our weaknesses so that in those situations, we would willingly reach for his strength.
That's what exile does.
It exposes our weaknesses, not to shame us, but to draw us back in to dependence.
The promise is not just a return to the land.
It's the return to something far, far greater.
It's the return to relationship.
I will be found by you.
God.
loved Israel enough to send them into exile.
Because he knew that by sending them in exile, he would draw them away from all the wicked things they had ran to and draw them back to himself.
The Lord loves you enough
to remove things from your life that you thought you needed.
He loves you enough to allow the thickness that you are struggling with to come into your life, to draw you deeper into his presence.
The Lord continues and he says, I will restore your fortunes.
I will gather you.
I will bring you back.
Notice the repetition here, right?
I will, I will, I will, I will, I will.
God is the agent of change.
He is the restorer.
He is the one who gathers.
God is the one who brings his people home.
See, exile is real, but it's not the end of the story.
God's final word over his people is not scattering, it's gathering.
Jeremiah wrote to ex-styles, but the story of the exile does not end in Babylon.
It ultimately points to Christ.
to Jesus who became the ultimate exile.
He left his home of origin.
He entered into our dislocation.
He was rejected and cast out of the city.
The one who truly belonged was treated as if he did not belong.
He became the ultimate exile so that we could be brought home again.
And now, as the author of Hebrews tells us, we fix our eyes on him, the author and the perfecter of our faith.
Not on the shifting circumstances, not on Babylon, not on the 70 years,
We fix our eyes on Jesus, the author and the perfecter of our faith.
Hebrews 11 speaks of men and women who lived by faith.
They lived by faith, yet they did not receive what was promised in their lifetime.
But they saw it from a distance and they welcomed it.
They confess that they were strangers and exiles on the earth.
And Hebrews tells us they desired a better country, a heavenly one.
And so Hebrews tells us that they died in faith, not because the promise had failed, but because the promise was bigger than their lifetime and they knew it.
That is the life of exile.
We live faithfully here.
We seek the good of the city now.
We pray, we plant, we serve, and we fix our eyes on Christ who became our exile and our homecoming.
Remember back
the beginning of the message when I talked about living in Hawaii and that was such a wonderful place to live.
Interestingly enough, Hawaii was kind of a exile of sorts for me.
I wasn't terribly happy there.
I was unsettled and disgruntled and frustrated
And I thought my problem was location and position.
And I thought that by leaving the proverbial paradise and going back to Bible college that I would leave my exile in the South Pacific.
How does that even sound possible?
And go back to of all places, Northeast PA and
feel satisfied and at home yet again.
I had no idea I was entering an exile that was far worse than anything I could have imagined.
And what the Lord revealed to me in that place, that it wasn't so much where I was that was the problem.
It was the posture of my heart
wherever I was, that was the problem.
And the Lord used Scranton in a miraculous way and the Lord used my early ministry in my last church in a miraculous way to show me that I'm in exile, to show me that to live faithfully in this world as an exile, as a foreigner,
I must wholly trust him and live with a posture of love towards those who are around me.
To build, to plant, to grow.
Only when I do that am I gonna find joy and hope and satisfaction in this life.
Right?
Because joy and hope and satisfaction in this life
It comes when we live with a sense that we belong to another country, a heavenly one.
Amen?
Spray.
Jesus, thank you for your word that feeds us day in and day out.
Oh, Lord, forgive us for the times when we are slow to pick it up, slow to read it, slow to take it in, slow to live out the realities
of your word and what you have called us to do.
But Lord, we know this morning that your mercies are new every morning, and so Lord, we bask in that mercy today.
We pray for the grace to endure in faith.
Thank you, Jesus, for your great love that you have for us in your name.
Amen.
Thank you so much for listening to the Crossway Christian Church sermon podcast.
We're so glad you could join us, and if you'd like to plug into the life of our community or have any questions that we might be able to answer, visit our website, crosswaycc.org, to connect with us.
Until the next time, we can be with you.
May the Lord bless you and keep you.